# Simulation Management Tools

An important part of the MGI effort is providing infrastructure and
tools to enable reproducible research in computational materials
science. For reproducible research to become a widely used, repeatable
human based process needs to be replaced by automated open-source
logging tools. This is especially the case for simulation management,
which is often poorly documented and recorded during the development
stages of a research project. A good practice is to use a dedicated
simulation management tool (SMT) throughout the development process
rather than creating an ad-hoc simulation management scheme. Listed
below are a number of requirements for an effective SMT.

## Sumatra Cloud App

Sumatra Cloud is a Flask App for displaying and manipulating data
generated by the Sumatra simulation management tool. It has a web API
and a web front end. The Sumatra Cloud App uses a combination of Flask
and MongoDB. Currently the Sumatra client required users to configure
and maintain their own databases for recording simulations. This is an
enormous hurdle for the casual user. The Sumatra Cloud App aims to
make it easy to use Sumatra. The Cloud App will be maintained on a web
hosting service like Google Apps or Heroku.

The development repository for the Sumatra Cloud App is on
[GitHub](https://github.com/materialsinnovation/sumatra-cloud).

## The Sumatra Client

One particular SMT that is currently being evaluated is Sumatra. It is
a is a lightweight system for recording the history and provenance
data for numerical simulations. It works particularly well for
scientists that are in the intermediate stage between developing a
code base and using that code base for active research. This is a
common scenario and often results in a mode of development that mixes
branching for both code development and production simulations. Using
Sumatra avoids this unintended use of the versioning system by
providing a lightweight design for recording the provenance data
independently from the versioning system used for the code
development. The lightweight design of Sumatra fits well with existing
ad-hoc patterns of simulation management contrasting with more
pervasive workflow tools, which can require a wholesale alteration of
work patterns. Sumatra uses a straightforward Django-based data model
enabling persistent data storage independently from the Sumatra
installation. Sumatra provides a command line utility with a
rudimentary web interface, but has the potential to become a full
web-based simulation management solution.

## Requirements for the Client

### Automation

Ideally, the logging and recording process is entirely automated with
the only researcher contribution being a small "commit messages" that
logs the researcher's thoughts, reasons and outcomes for running the
simulation.

### Integrated with Version Control

The SMT should be entirely integrated and aware of the common
distributed version control (DVC) tools such as Git, Bazaar and
Mercurial. The provenance data and simulation data should not be
recorded by the version control system, only the SMT project data
should be held in version control.

### REST API

The SMT client should communicate using a REST API completely
independent of any backend databases.

### Simple Local Recrods Storage

The SMT should have a simple local store (dump to JSON) for when the
API is unavailable.

### Data

Output data files should be hashed to enable effective replication and
future regression testing with a continuous integration tool.

### Integrate low level tests

Low overhead for integration of low level regression tests with each
provenance record.

### Record Dependencies

All dependencies should be automatically recorded as well as
uninstalled development repositories that the simulation depends
on. This is hard to achieve across multiple language barriers, but one
of the most important requirements.

### Live Inspection

The SMT should be aware of the status of live jobs and send updates
via the API.

### Parallel

The SMT needs to be aware of provenance data associated with parallel
jobs (such as which nodes are being used) as well as awareness of
various queuing systems.

### Other Provenance Data

Every record (simulation) should have a unique ID and an associated time stamp.

### Sumatra

One particular SMT that is currently being evaluated is Sumatra. It is
a is a lightweight system for recording the history and provenance
data for numerical simulations. It works particularly well for
scientists that are in the intermediate stage between developing a
code base and using that code base for active research. This is a
common scenario and often results in a mode of development that mixes
branching for both code development and production simulations. Using
Sumatra avoids this unintended use of the versioning system by
providing a lightweight design for recording the provenance data
independently from the versioning system used for the code
development. The lightweight design of Sumatra fits well with existing
ad-hoc patterns of simulation management contrasting with more
pervasive workflow tools, which can require a wholesale alteration of
work patterns. Sumatra uses a straightforward Django-based data model
enabling persistent data storage independently from the Sumatra
installation. Sumatra provides a command line utility with a
rudimentary web interface, but has the potential to become a full
web-based simulation management solution.



